Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
drug metabolism and pharmacogenetics. I shall take the candidate through it,
question by question. Let us begin.
We turn to drug metabolism. What is its purpose?
The purpose of metabolism is to convert drugs, which are often lipid-soluble,
into more water-soluble compounds that can be excreted by the kidney,
and usually to terminate their pharmacological action.
A lipid-soluble drug that was simply filtered at the glomerulus would be reabsorbed
along the tubule and never eliminated, so it must first be made polar.
Metabolism generally inactivates a drug, but not always:
it may produce active metabolites that contribute to or prolong the effect,
or toxic metabolites responsible for harm,
and some drugs are administered as inactive prodrugs that require metabolism to
become active.
So metabolism is chiefly about facilitating elimination and terminating action,
with these important exceptions.
Where does metabolism take place?
The liver is the principal organ of drug metabolism,
rich in the enzyme systems required, and most drugs are metabolised there.
But metabolism is not exclusively hepatic:
significant extrahepatic metabolism occurs in the lungs,
which take up and metabolise drugs such as propofol on first pass;
in the plasma and tissues, where non-specific esterases hydrolyse drugs such as
remifectanil and suxamethonium; in the gut wall,
contributing to first-pass metabolism; in the kidneys; and elsewhere.
Some drugs undergo spontaneous, non-enzymatic breakdown independent of any organ,
as atracurium does by Hofmann degradation. Recognising extrahepatic routes is
clinically valuable because such drugs may be used safely in hepatic failure.
Describe the phases of metabolism.
Metabolism is conventionally divided into two phases.
Phase one reactions — oxidation, reduction and hydrolysis — introduce or unmask a
reactive, polar functional group such as a hydroxyl, amino or carboxyl group,
making the molecule a suitable substrate for the next phase or for excretion.
Phase two reactions are conjugations,
in which the drug or its phase one metabolite is joined to an endogenous molecule —
glucuronic acid, sulphate, glutathione,
an acetyl or methyl group — producing a highly water-soluble,
usually inactive conjugate for excretion.
Many drugs undergo phase one then phase two, but some go directly to conjugation,
and some are eliminated unchanged. Phase one reactions tend to make small changes
in activity, whereas phase two generally abolishes it.
Tell me about the cytochrome P450 system.
The cytochrome P450 enzymes are a superfamily of haem-containing oxidases,
located chiefly in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes,
that catalyse the majority of phase one oxidation reactions.
They are named by family, subfamily and individual enzyme — for example CYP3A4,
the single most important isoform, which metabolises a large proportion of drugs,
and CYP2D6 and CYP2C9, which are also major contributors.
The system is the principal site of metabolic drug interactions,
because the enzymes can be induced or inhibited by other drugs,
and it is highly variable between individuals on a genetic basis,
which underlies much of the variability in drug response.
Understanding which enzyme metabolises a drug allows interactions and variability
to be predicted.
Give examples of phase one reactions.
Oxidation is the commonest, mediated largely by cytochrome P450 — the hydroxylation
of many drugs, the dealkylation of others such as the demethylation of ketamine to
norketamine, and oxidative deamination.
Reduction is less common but occurs,
for instance in the reductive metabolism of some agents under low oxygen tension,
relevant to halothane.
Hydrolysis cleaves ester and amide bonds,
as in the breakdown of ester local anaesthetics and of remifectanil by esterases,
and of suxamethonium by plasma cholinesterase.
These phase one reactions either activate a prodrug, inactivate the drug,
or prepare it for conjugation, depending on the molecule.
And phase two conjugation reactions?
The principal conjugations are glucuronidation, the most important,
in which glucuronic acid is added — as in the metabolism of morphine to its
glucuronides and of propofol; sulphation; acetylation,
important for drugs such as isoniazid and hydralazine and subject to genetic
variation; glutathione conjugation,
which is the protective pathway for reactive metabolites; and methylation.
These reactions almost always produce inactive,
highly water-soluble products for renal or biliary excretion.
The conjugating capacity can be saturated or depleted — the depletion of
glutathione in paracetamol overdose being the critical example — and is reduced in
the neonate, in whom immature glucuronidation has clinical consequences.
What is first-pass metabolism?
First-pass, or pre-systemic, metabolism is the metabolism of an orally administered
drug during its first passage from the gut,
through the portal circulation and the liver,
before it reaches the systemic circulation.
Blood draining the gut passes via the portal vein to the liver,
so a drug that is highly extracted there has a large fraction removed before it
ever reaches the systemic circulation, reducing its oral bioavailability.
Glyceryl trinitrate, morphine and propranolol show extensive first-pass metabolism,
which is why their oral doses are much larger than their intravenous doses,
or why other routes are used.
Metabolism in the gut wall itself, for instance by CYP3A4,
also contributes to the first-pass effect.
Discuss active metabolites with examples.
Several drugs have pharmacologically active metabolites that shape the clinical
picture. Morphine is metabolised to morphine-six-glucuronide,
an active opioid more potent than the parent that accumulates in renal impairment
and prolongs the effect.
Ketamine is demethylated to norketamine,
which contributes to analgesia during infusions.
Diazepam has several active metabolites, including desmethyldiazepam,
prolonging its action.
Codeine is essentially a prodrug, requiring metabolism by CYP2D6 to morphine for
its analgesic effect.
The lesson is that I cannot consider the parent drug alone:
active metabolites may dominate the effect,
particularly when the drug is given repeatedly or when their elimination is
impaired.
And toxic metabolites?
Metabolism can generate harmful as well as inactive products.
The cardinal example is paracetamol, normally conjugated safely but, in overdose,
increasingly oxidised by cytochrome P450 to the reactive metabolite
N-acetyl-para-benzoquinone-imine, which is detoxified by glutathione until that is
depleted, after which it causes hepatocellular necrosis — the basis of treatment
with N-acetylcysteine to replenish glutathione.
Pethidine is metabolised to norpethidine, which is proconvulsant and accumulates.
Halothane can be metabolised to reactive intermediates implicated in halothane
hepatitis.
So metabolism is not invariably detoxifying,
and the generation of reactive metabolites underlies several important drug
toxicities.
What is a prodrug? Give anaesthetic examples.
A prodrug is an inactive or less active compound converted by metabolism into the
active drug, designed to overcome a limitation of the active molecule — poor
solubility, poor absorption, instability, or to delay or target activation.
Codeine is a prodrug requiring conversion to morphine.
Parecoxib is a prodrug hydrolysed to the active cyclo-oxygenase-two inhibitor
valdecoxib.
Fospropofol is a water-soluble phosphate-ester prodrug of propofol,
hydrolysed by alkaline phosphatase, developed to avoid the lipid emulsion.
The concept is a deliberate use of the body's metabolic machinery to deliver an
active drug from a more convenient or safer precursor.
Explain enzyme induction, with examples and its time course.
Enzyme induction is an increase in the amount or activity of metabolising enzymes,
usually through increased synthesis, in response to certain drugs and chemicals.
Because it depends on protein synthesis,
it develops gradually over days to weeks and resolves slowly after the inducer is
stopped.
Inducers — the anticonvulsants phenytoin and carbamazepine, rifampicin,
chronic alcohol and the barbiturates — accelerate the metabolism of co-administered
drugs, reducing their effect; a notable hazard arises when the inducer is withdrawn
and the concentration of the affected drug then rises.
Induction can also increase the production of toxic metabolites,
as chronic alcohol does for paracetamol. Its slow,
delayed time course is clinically important and easily missed.
And enzyme inhibition?
Enzyme inhibition is a reduction in metabolising-enzyme activity,
usually by competition for or binding to the enzyme,
and it is generally more rapid in onset than induction — occurring within hours as
soon as the inhibitor reaches effective concentrations.
Inhibitors — erythromycin and clarithromycin, the azole antifungals,
certain antiretrovirals, grapefruit juice — reduce the metabolism of
co-administered drugs, raising their concentrations and risking toxicity,
which is dangerous for drugs of narrow therapeutic index.
The contrasting time courses matter:
an interaction from inhibition appears quickly and a clinician may link it to the
new drug, whereas one from induction is delayed and may be attributed elsewhere or
appear only on withdrawal.
Relate metabolism to the hepatic extraction ratio.
The hepatic extraction ratio — the fraction of drug removed in a single passage
through the liver — determines how a drug's clearance responds to changes.
A high-extraction drug, such as propofol or lidocaine,
is cleared as fast as it is delivered,
so its clearance is flow-limited and falls when hepatic blood flow falls,
for instance under anaesthesia or in heart failure,
but is relatively insensitive to enzyme induction or inhibition.
A low-extraction drug, such as warfarin or phenytoin,
is cleared according to the intrinsic enzyme capacity and the free fraction,
so it is capacity-limited and sensitive to enzyme induction and inhibition and to
changes in protein binding.
So whether a metabolic interaction matters depends on the drug's extraction ratio.
Give examples of organ-independent metabolism and explain their value.
Some drugs are eliminated by routes independent of hepatic or renal function,
which is valuable in organ failure.
Atracurium undergoes Hofmann degradation, a spontaneous,
non-enzymatic breakdown at body temperature and pH, together with ester hydrolysis;
cisatracurium relies still more on Hofmann elimination.
Remifectanil is hydrolysed by non-specific plasma and tissue esterases,
giving an extremely short, organ-independent, context-insensitive offset.
Suxamethonium and the ester local anaesthetics are hydrolysed by plasma
cholinesterase.
The value is predictable behaviour without accumulation in hepatic or renal
failure, so these agents are preferred when organ function is poor,
and they illustrate that not all elimination depends on the liver and kidney.
How do age and disease affect metabolism?
In the neonate, the enzyme systems are immature — particularly glucuronidation,
the deficiency of which underlies the historical grey-baby syndrome with
chloramphenicol — so metabolism is slow and doses must be reduced and intervals
lengthened, with maturation over the first months.
In the elderly, reduced hepatic mass and blood flow reduce the clearance of
flow-limited drugs.
Hepatic disease reduces metabolic capacity,
more so for flow-limited drugs when perfusion is reduced or shunted and for
capacity-limited drugs when synthetic function fails,
and reduced albumin raises free fractions.
Cardiac failure, by reducing hepatic blood flow,
reduces the clearance of flow-limited drugs.
In all of these, I would reduce doses, prefer organ-independent agents,
and titrate carefully.
Now pharmacogenetics. What is it, and why does it matter?
Pharmacogenetics is the study of how inherited genetic variation influences the
response to drugs.
It matters because such variation is a major source of the differences between
patients in both drug handling and drug effect,
and because some inherited variants produce dangerous,
idiosyncratic responses to ordinary anaesthetic drugs.
The variation may be kinetic — in metabolising enzymes, transporters — or dynamic,
in receptors and other targets.
Several specific variants are essential anaesthetic knowledge,
because recognising them prevents catastrophe,
and the broader field of pharmacogenomics points towards individualised,
genotype-guided prescribing in the future.
Describe plasma cholinesterase variation and suxamethonium apnoea.
Suxamethonium is normally hydrolysed rapidly by plasma cholinesterase,
also called butyrylcholinesterase, giving its brief action.
The enzyme is genetically variable, with several abnormal alleles,
the commonest being the atypical, dibucaine-resistant variant.
A patient homozygous for an abnormal allele hydrolyses suxamethonium very slowly
and suffers a greatly prolonged paralysis — suxamethonium apnoea — requiring
continued ventilation and sedation until the block recovers spontaneously.
The phenotype is characterised by the dibucaine number,
the percentage to which dibucaine inhibits the enzyme:
around eighty for the normal enzyme, intermediate for the heterozygote,
and around twenty for the homozygous atypical.
Acquired causes — liver disease, pregnancy, malnutrition,
certain drugs — also lower activity. It is the classic anaesthetic pharmacogenetic
example.
Explain acetylator status.
Acetylation, a phase two conjugation by N-acetyltransferase,
shows genetic polymorphism dividing people into fast and slow acetylators,
in proportions that vary between populations.
Slow acetylators metabolise certain drugs more slowly and are more prone to their
dose-related toxicity — peripheral neuropathy with isoniazid,
a lupus-like syndrome with hydralazine and procainamide — whereas fast acetylators
may underrespond.
This is a clear demonstration that a single enzyme polymorphism alters both
efficacy and toxicity, and it influences the choice and dose of the affected drugs.
Describe the importance of CYP2D6 polymorphism, particularly for codeine.
CYP2D6 is a polymorphic cytochrome enzyme,
and individuals range from poor metabolisers, who lack functional enzyme,
to ultra-rapid metabolisers, who have multiple gene copies.
Because codeine is a prodrug requiring CYP2D6 to convert it to morphine for
analgesia, poor metabolisers gain little analgesia from codeine,
while ultra-rapid metabolisers convert it rapidly and extensively to morphine,
with a risk of opioid toxicity — a risk that has caused deaths,
notably in breastfed infants of ultra-rapid-metaboliser mothers and in children,
leading to restrictions on codeine use in these groups.
CYP2D6 also affects the metabolism of many other drugs,
so its polymorphism is one of the most clinically significant in pharmacogenetics.
Give examples of inherited variation in the drug target rather than in metabolism.
Two are essential.
Malignant hyperthermia is an inherited susceptibility,
usually involving the ryanodine receptor of skeletal muscle,
in which exposure to volatile agents or suxamethonium triggers uncontrolled calcium
release and a life-threatening hypermetabolic crisis — a pharmacodynamic,
target-based pharmacogenetic disorder.
The porphyrias are inherited disorders of haem synthesis in which barbiturates and
other enzyme-inducing drugs can precipitate an acute, potentially fatal crisis.
Glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency predisposes to drug-induced
haemolysis.
These conditions are managed by recognition and trigger avoidance,
and they show that pharmacogenetic variation operates on the dynamic as well as the
kinetic side.
Where is pharmacogenetics heading?
The broader field of pharmacogenomics aims to use an individual's genetic
information to guide drug choice and dose — to predict who will respond,
who will not, and who is at risk of toxicity — moving towards genuinely
personalised prescribing.
Genotyping is already used in some areas of medicine,
such as oncology and certain cardiovascular and psychiatric drugs,
and pre-emptive panels of pharmacogenetic variants are being introduced.
In anaesthesia its present role is chiefly in recognising and avoiding the
established inherited susceptibilities,
but the direction of travel is towards using genetic information more routinely to
individualise therapy.
The limitation is that drug response is multifactorial,
so genetics is one determinant among many.
Pull it together: how does an understanding of metabolism and pharmacogenetics make
you a safer prescriber?
It lets me anticipate rather than react.
Knowing the routes and phases of metabolism,
I predict accumulation of drugs and their active metabolites in hepatic,
renal or cardiac failure, and choose organ-independent agents such as atracurium
and remifectanil when organ function is poor.
Knowing about induction and inhibition,
I foresee interactions and their differing time courses.
Knowing about active and toxic metabolites,
I avoid the traps of morphine-six-glucuronide in renal failure and of paracetamol
toxicity.
And knowing the inherited variants — plasma cholinesterase, acetylator status,
CYP2D6, malignant hyperthermia, porphyria — I recognise and avoid catastrophic
idiosyncratic responses.
In each case the knowledge converts a list of facts into a prediction about the
individual patient, which is the essence of safe prescribing.
Explain saturation kinetics and the move from first-order to zero-order elimination.
Most drugs are eliminated by first-order kinetics,
in which a constant fraction is removed per unit time,
because the enzymes are working well below saturation;
the rate is proportional to concentration.
When the concentration rises high enough to saturate the metabolising enzymes,
elimination becomes zero-order, a constant amount removed per unit time regardless
of concentration, described by Michaelis-Menten kinetics.
The clinical importance is that once saturation is reached,
small increases in dose produce disproportionate,
unpredictable rises in concentration.
Phenytoin shows this within its therapeutic range, making its dosing hazardous;
ethanol is eliminated at a constant rate;
and thiopental shifts towards zero-order at the high concentrations of repeated
dosing, contributing to its accumulation.
Saturation kinetics is therefore a key safety concept.
What is enterohepatic recirculation?
Enterohepatic recirculation is the cycling of a drug between the liver and the gut.
A drug or its conjugate is excreted in the bile into the intestine,
where gut bacteria may hydrolyse the conjugate back to the parent drug,
which is then reabsorbed into the portal circulation and returned to the liver.
This recycling prolongs the drug's presence in the body and can produce a secondary
peak in its concentration.
It is relevant to certain drugs and to the interruption of the cycle — for
instance, the reduced efficacy of the oral contraceptive when antibiotics disturb
the gut flora, or the use of repeated activated charcoal to interrupt recirculation
in some poisonings.
It is a route by which metabolism and excretion are not the end of a drug's life.
Name the major cytochrome isoforms and their relevance.
The most important is CYP3A4, which metabolises a very large proportion of drugs
and is inhibited by the macrolides,
azole antifungals and grapefruit juice and induced by rifampicin and the
anticonvulsants — the source of many interactions.
CYP2D6 is highly polymorphic and activates codeine and metabolises many
cardiovascular and psychiatric drugs. CYP2C9 metabolises warfarin and phenytoin and
is also polymorphic.
CYP1A2 metabolises some drugs and is induced by smoking,
which is why smokers may need higher doses of certain agents.
Knowing which isoform handles a drug, and what induces or inhibits that isoform,
allows interactions and individual variability to be predicted rather than merely
encountered.
Which routes of administration avoid first-pass metabolism?
Any route that delivers the drug into the systemic circulation without first
traversing the portal system and liver largely avoids the first-pass effect.
The intravenous route obviously does.
The sublingual and buccal routes drain into the systemic venous system,
which is why sublingual glyceryl trinitrate is effective despite extensive
first-pass metabolism of the swallowed drug.
The transdermal route similarly bypasses the liver on first pass.
The rectal route partly avoids it, since the lower rectum drains systemically while
the upper rectum drains to the portal system.
Inhalation delivers directly to the systemic circulation via the lungs.
Choosing such a route is a way of overcoming a high first-pass effect that would
otherwise render an oral drug ineffective.
Describe the neonatal handling of drugs and the grey baby syndrome.
The neonate handles drugs differently because of immature organ function:
reduced glomerular filtration, immature hepatic enzyme systems,
a higher proportion of body water, reduced protein binding and an immature
blood-brain barrier.
Glucuronidation in particular is deficient at birth and matures over the first
weeks to months.
The classic illustration is the grey baby syndrome, in which chloramphenicol,
normally glucuronidated, accumulates in the neonate because of immature
conjugation, producing cardiovascular collapse with a characteristic ashen-grey
appearance.
The lesson is that neonatal doses cannot be scaled simply from adult doses;
immature metabolism and excretion demand reduced doses and lengthened intervals,
with careful titration.
Expand on plasma cholinesterase: acquired causes of low activity and the management
of suxamethonium apnoea.
Besides the genetic variants, plasma cholinesterase activity is reduced by acquired
factors: liver disease, where it is synthesised; pregnancy;
malnutrition and severe illness; renal and cardiac failure; and certain drugs,
including anticholinesterases, metoclopramide and the oral contraceptive.
These reduce but do not usually abolish activity,
so they prolong suxamethonium only modestly, unlike the homozygous genetic variant.
If suxamethonium apnoea occurs, the management is supportive:
maintain anaesthesia and sedation and continue controlled ventilation until the
block recovers spontaneously, monitoring with a nerve stimulator,
since there is no antidote.
Afterwards I would investigate with cholinesterase activity and the dibucaine and
fluoride numbers, inform the patient, issue a warning card, and screen the family,
because it is inherited.
What is understood about halothane hepatitis?
Halothane hepatitis is a rare but severe immune-mediated hepatotoxicity.
Halothane undergoes oxidative metabolism to a reactive trifluoroacetyl intermediate
that binds to hepatic proteins, forming neoantigens; in susceptible,
usually previously exposed individuals,
an immune response against these altered proteins produces fulminant hepatic
necrosis, with a high mortality.
Risk factors include repeated exposure over a short interval, obesity,
middle age and female sex.
The recognition of this mechanism, and of a milder,
commoner subclinical hepatic disturbance,
contributed to the replacement of halothane by agents undergoing far less
metabolism, such as isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane.
It is a clear example of metabolism generating a reactive species that drives an
idiosyncratic, immune toxicity.
Why have codeine and tramadol use been restricted in certain groups?
Because both depend on CYP2D6, which is polymorphic.
Codeine requires conversion by CYP2D6 to morphine for analgesia,
and tramadol's active metabolite is similarly formed.
Ultra-rapid metabolisers convert these prodrugs to their active opioids rapidly and
extensively, producing unexpectedly high opioid concentrations and a risk of
life-threatening respiratory depression.
Deaths in children after tonsillectomy,
and in breastfed infants of ultra-rapid-metaboliser mothers,
led regulators to restrict or contraindicate codeine and tramadol in young
children, after tonsillectomy and adenoidectomy, and in breastfeeding.
It is a striking real-world consequence of pharmacogenetic variation,
and a reason these prodrug opioids are now used with much greater caution.
Define the genetic terms used in pharmacogenetics,
and comment on population variation.
A polymorphism is a genetic variant occurring in a population at appreciable
frequency; an allele is one version of a gene;
the genotype is the genetic constitution and the phenotype is the observable
characteristic it produces, here the metabolic capacity.
Pharmacogenetic traits often show variation between populations,
because the frequency of the relevant alleles differs by ancestry — the proportions
of slow acetylators, of CYP2D6 variants,
and of glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency all vary geographically.
This matters for the applicability of dosing recommendations across populations and
for the design of any genotype-guided prescribing,
and it is one reason a country-neutral curriculum must teach the principle while
noting that allele frequencies differ.
What role do drug transporters such as P-glycoprotein play?
Drug transporters actively move drugs across membranes and are an increasingly
recognised determinant of drug handling alongside the metabolising enzymes.
P-glycoprotein is an efflux transporter that pumps drugs out of cells — out of
enterocytes back into the gut lumen, limiting absorption;
out of the brain across the blood-brain barrier, limiting central penetration;
and into the bile and urine, aiding excretion.
It is itself subject to genetic variation, and to induction and inhibition,
so it contributes to both interindividual variability and drug interactions,
sometimes in parallel with CYP3A4, with which it shares substrates.
Transporters thus add a further layer to the prediction of how a drug will
distribute and be eliminated.
Give examples of pharmacogenetic testing already used in wider medicine.
Several are established. Thiopurine methyltransferase activity is tested before
azathioprine or mercaptopurine, because deficient patients accumulate toxic
metabolites and risk severe myelosuppression.
The HLA-B-fifty-seven-oh-one genotype is tested before abacavir to avoid a serious
hypersensitivity reaction, and related HLA variants predict severe skin reactions
to carbamazepine in certain populations.
Dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase deficiency predicts severe toxicity from
fluorouracil.
These examples, from immunology, infectious disease and oncology,
show genotype-guided prescribing already in routine use,
and they indicate the direction in which prescribing more broadly,
including in anaesthesia and pain medicine, is likely to move.
Explain malignant hyperthermia as an inherited pharmacogenetic disorder and how
susceptibility is identified.
Malignant hyperthermia is an inherited disorder of skeletal muscle,
usually transmitted in an autosomal dominant pattern and most often involving
mutations of the ryanodine receptor that governs calcium release from the
sarcoplasmic reticulum.
On exposure to a triggering agent — a volatile anaesthetic or suxamethonium — there
is uncontrolled calcium release, sustained muscle contraction and a hypermetabolic
crisis with rising carbon dioxide, tachycardia, rigidity,
hyperthermia and acidosis, treated with dantrolene and trigger removal.
Susceptibility is identified by careful personal and family history,
and confirmed by the in-vitro contracture test on a muscle biopsy,
in which muscle is exposed to halothane and caffeine,
increasingly supplemented by genetic testing.
Recognition allows a trigger-free anaesthetic to be planned,
which is the essence of safe management.
Pull together a practical approach to the patient with hepatic or renal failure.
I would reason from the pharmacology.
I would prefer drugs eliminated independently of the failing organ — atracurium or
cisatracurium for neuromuscular blockade through Hofmann degradation,
remifentanil for analgesia through esterase hydrolysis — because their handling is
predictable regardless of hepatic and renal function.
I would anticipate the accumulation of drugs and active metabolites that depend on
the failing organ, such as morphine and its active glucuronide in renal failure.
I would reduce doses and lengthen intervals for hepatically cleared drugs in liver
failure, mindful of reduced protein binding raising free fractions and of reduced
hepatic blood flow lowering the clearance of flow-limited drugs.
And I would titrate every agent carefully to effect.
The principle throughout is to let the route of elimination, not habit,
choose the drug.
Work through the flow- and capacity-limited distinction in the context of
anaesthesia.
Under general anaesthesia, hepatic blood flow commonly falls — through the
cardiovascular effects of the agents,
positive-pressure ventilation and surgical factors.
For a high-extraction, flow-limited drug such as propofol or lidocaine,
clearance follows delivery, so reduced hepatic blood flow reduces clearance and the
drug accumulates more than expected during anaesthesia.
For a low-extraction, capacity-limited drug such as phenytoin or warfarin,
clearance depends on enzyme activity and free fraction rather than flow,
so it is relatively unaffected by the fall in flow but is sensitive instead to
enzyme induction or inhibition and to changes in protein binding.
So the same fall in hepatic blood flow matters greatly for one class and little for
the other, which I would factor into dosing during prolonged anaesthesia.
Which drugs precipitate haemolysis in glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase
deficiency?
Glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency,
an inherited enzymopathy common in some populations,
leaves red cells unable to defend against oxidative stress,
so oxidant drugs precipitate acute haemolysis.
The classic precipitants include the antimalarials primaquine and related
compounds, sulphonamides and dapsone, nitrofurantoin, and some others,
as well as fava beans and infection.
Of relevance to anaesthesia, certain drugs are best avoided or used cautiously,
and methylene blue — itself used as an antidote for methaemoglobinaemia — is
hazardous in these patients.
The practical point is to take a history, be aware of the geographic distribution,
and avoid known oxidant precipitants, choosing alternatives where possible.
Complete the phenotyping of plasma cholinesterase variants.
The variants are characterised by inhibition tests that give characteristic numbers.
The dibucaine number is the percentage by which dibucaine inhibits the enzyme:
around eighty for the normal homozygote,
around forty to sixty for the heterozygote,
and around twenty for the homozygous atypical variant,
who suffers the most prolonged apnoea.
The fluoride number, using fluoride as the inhibitor,
identifies a separate fluoride-resistant variant.
There is also a silent variant with little or no enzyme activity,
and combinations of these alleles produce a spectrum of phenotypes.
Measuring activity together with the dibucaine and fluoride numbers therefore both
confirms the diagnosis after an episode of apnoea and characterises the variant for
family screening and counselling.
Take morphine in renal failure as a worked example of metabolite accumulation.
Morphine is metabolised by glucuronidation to morphine-three-glucuronide,
which is largely inactive as an analgesic, and morphine-six-glucuronide,
which is a potent active opioid more potent than morphine itself.
Both glucuronides are eliminated by the kidney.
In renal failure, morphine-six-glucuronide accumulates,
producing prolonged and potentially dangerous opioid effects — sedation and
respiratory depression — even when the parent morphine concentration seems
unremarkable.
The lesson is that in renal impairment I would avoid or greatly reduce morphine and
prefer an opioid without active renally-cleared metabolites, such as fentanyl,
or an organ-independent agent such as remifentanil,
illustrating how knowledge of an active metabolite's elimination directly changes
the choice of drug.
What is meant by bioactivation and idiosyncratic drug reactions?
Bioactivation is the metabolic conversion of a drug into a reactive,
chemically active species — often by cytochrome P450 — which,
instead of being safely eliminated,
binds to cellular macromolecules and causes harm.
When the reactive metabolite damages the cell directly,
the result is dose-related toxicity, as with the paracetamol metabolite.
When it binds to proteins to form neoantigens that provoke an immune response,
the result is an idiosyncratic, immune-mediated reaction,
unpredictable from the dose, as in halothane hepatitis and some drug-induced
hypersensitivity.
These reactions are a major reason that metabolism is not synonymous with
detoxification, and that some serious adverse effects appear only in susceptible
individuals or on re-exposure.
Summarise the most dangerous metabolic interactions to hold in mind.
Several recur.
A potent enzyme inhibitor — a macrolide, an azole antifungal,
or ritonavir — added to a drug of narrow therapeutic index metabolised by the same
isoform can raise its concentration to toxic levels,
the classic example being raised concentrations of drugs metabolised by CYP3A4.
An enzyme inducer — rifampicin, phenytoin,
carbamazepine — can cause therapeutic failure of co-administered drugs,
and dangerous rebound when it is withdrawn,
including reduced efficacy of the oral contraceptive and of warfarin.
Inhibition of warfarin's metabolism risks bleeding; its induction risks thrombosis.
Drugs that lower plasma cholinesterase prolong suxamethonium.
Holding in mind which drugs are potent inducers or inhibitors,
and which drugs are vulnerable, allows the dangerous combinations to be anticipated
and avoided.
Why must dosing guidance acknowledge population variation in metabolising enzymes?
Because the frequencies of the relevant alleles differ between populations,
the same standard dose can carry different risks in different groups.
The proportion of slow acetylators,
the distribution of CYP2D6 phenotypes including poor and ultra-rapid metabolisers,
and the prevalence of glucose-six-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency and of
plasma-cholinesterase variants all vary with ancestry.
A dosing recommendation derived in one population may therefore over- or
under-treat, or carry a different toxicity risk, in another.
The principle for a universally applicable teaching is to understand the mechanism
and the spectrum of variation, to take a careful personal and family history,
and to titrate to effect, rather than to assume that one population's average
response applies to every patient.
How does cigarette smoking affect drug metabolism?
The polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in cigarette smoke are potent inducers of the
cytochrome enzyme CYP1A2, so smokers metabolise drugs handled by that isoform more
rapidly and may require higher doses to achieve the same effect — theophylline and
certain other agents among them.
The clinically useful corollary is that when a patient stops smoking,
abruptly as on admission to hospital,
the induction wanes over days and the concentrations of affected drugs rise,
risking toxicity, so doses may need review.
This is a common, easily overlooked example of enzyme induction by an environmental
agent rather than a drug, and a reminder to take a smoking history into account
when prescribing affected drugs.
Describe atracurium's dual elimination and the significance of laudanosine.
Atracurium is eliminated by two organ-independent routes: Hofmann degradation,
a spontaneous, non-enzymatic breakdown that depends on normal body temperature and
pH and accelerates when these rise;
and ester hydrolysis by non-specific plasma esterases.
This dual, organ-independent elimination gives predictable offset without
accumulation in hepatic or renal failure,
the property that makes it valuable in organ dysfunction.
A product of Hofmann degradation is laudanosine,
which at high concentrations is a central-nervous-system stimulant capable of
causing seizures in animal models; in clinical practice the concentrations reached
are well below this threshold, but laudanosine accumulates in renal failure and
with prolonged infusion.
Cisatracurium, relying more on Hofmann elimination and being more potent,
generates less laudanosine, which is one of its advantages over the parent mixture.
Why does the contrasting time course of induction and inhibition matter at the
bedside?
It matters because it changes how an interaction presents and how easily it is
recognised.
Enzyme inhibition begins within hours,
as soon as the inhibitor reaches effective concentration,
so the resulting rise in the affected drug's concentration appears quickly and a
clinician is more likely to connect it to the newly started inhibitor.
Enzyme induction develops over days to weeks,
because it depends on new enzyme synthesis, and resolves equally slowly,
so the loss of effect of a co-administered drug appears late and may be missed or
wrongly attributed, and a dangerous rebound rise in concentration can occur days
after the inducer is stopped.
Recognising these timelines lets me anticipate when in the course of treatment an
interaction will declare itself, and to review doses both when an inducer or
inhibitor is started and, crucially, when it is withdrawn.
Thank you. That was a thorough and well-structured account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Metabolism converts lipophilic drugs to water-soluble forms for excretion
and usually terminates action: phase I (oxidation/reduction/hydrolysis,
mainly cytochrome P450) and phase II (conjugation).
Second, Metabolism can generate active metabolites (morphine-6-glucuronide,
norketamine) and toxic ones (NAPQI from paracetamol, norpethidine);
some drugs are prodrugs (codeine, parecoxib, fospropofol).
Third, Enzyme induction is slow in onset (days–weeks) and reduces drug effect;
inhibition is rapid and raises concentrations — their impact depends on whether the
drug is flow- or capacity-limited.
Fourth, Organ-independent elimination (Hofmann degradation of atracurium,
ester hydrolysis of remifentanil and suxamethonium) gives predictable handling in
hepatic and renal failure. 5.
Key pharmacogenetic variants are essential safety knowledge:
plasma-cholinesterase atypia (suxamethonium apnoea), acetylator status,
CYP2D6 (codeine), malignant hyperthermia and porphyria.
Thank you. That concludes the station.